In this exercise, we want to extend the Pan-Tompkins algorithm,
by improving the detection steps so
that we can be more robust to some of the failure modes.
But before we can really iterate on the algorithm,
we need a way to evaluate its performance to know if any changes
we make actually improve the algorithm or make it worse.
We'll compute precision and recall and use
those numbers to judge our algorithm's performance.
This was the function I gave you to help us evaluate our algorithm performance.
It takes in the reference towards locations,
as well as the output of our QRS complex detector,
which we'll call, estimate peaks.
Then the tolerance of how far
our estimates can be off from the reference in number of samples.
This accounts for the fact that the reference won't actually be
exactly at the sample location as our algorithms,
even when they mark the same QRS complex.
Until this function returns,
the number of QRS complexes that we detect correctly,
the number that we missed,
and the number of spurious detections.
Once we have all that,
we can then, use these numbers to compute precision and recall,
because the number of correct detections is basically our true positives,
and the number of spurious detections are our false positives.
So we can compute precision using this formula.
Then the number of QRS complexes that we missed
are our false negatives and so this would be the recall.
So there were three strategies that we wanted to
implement to improve our Pan-Tompkins algorithm.
The first one is called refractory period blanking,
which takes advantage of the fact that depolarization has to occur to some extent,
before a cell can contract again, and this takes time.
So we'll say that it's physiologically impossible for
two QRS complexes to occur within 200 milliseconds of each other.
If our detector does fine to QRS complexes within this window,
we'll say that the larger one is
a true QRS complex and the smaller one is a spurious detection,
so we want to throw that one out.
So the way we implement this is,
first by sorting our peaks by height and then we want to convert the refractory period,
which was given to us in milliseconds to number of samples.
We then iterate through this sorted list of peaks one-by-one,
and add a peak to a new list.
If, there doesn't already exist a peak in that list within 200 milliseconds of this one.
So then at the end of this process,
we are left with only peaks that do not violate the refractory period.
Next, we want it to implement
adaptive thresholding because QRS complex heights can change over time.
This is especially true on long signals where electrodes can shift around
or moisture can build up and this changes the height of the QRS complexes.
This is really easy to implement.
With pandas, we take a running mean of our peak heights,
and then we want it to use 70 percent of that mean as our threshold.
So what we're left with,
is an array of thresholds,
one for each peak.
We then only return the peaks that exceed this threshold.
The final strategy we want it to implement was called T-wave discrimination.
This is important because
sometimes especially large T waves may get confused for spurious QRS complexes.
We can discriminate between a large T-wave and a QRS complex,
by looking at the slope.
Specifically, if the maximum slope around
our suspected T-wave is less than half of the wave previous,
then it's a T-wave, if not,
it's an early QRS complex.
So this is the code for a T-wave discrimination.
First, we convert our windows that were given to us in milliseconds in to samples,
and then we find all possible peaks that might be T-waves.
We do this by looking for peaks that occur within this period of the proceeding wave.
For each possible T-wave,
we find the slope around this peak,
as well as the maximum slope around the preceding peak.
If this slope is less than half of the preceding slope,
we mark this peak as belonging to a T-wave,
and then remove all the T-waves from our list of peaks.
Now we can run the code that loads
our dataset and evaluates the performance of our algorithm.
We see that we end up with a precision of 95 percent,
and a recall of 87 percent.
As mentioned earlier in this lesson,
finding the QRS peak is an important step for many downstream algorithms.
Next, we'll take a look at building
an atrial fibrillation detection algorithm from these QRS peak locations.